---
---

## The diffusion SHARD pipeline

### Inputs

**From reconstruction pipeline:** `rawdata/sub-{subid}/ses-{sesid}`

| Description                                                                             | Filename                                                                  |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Multi-band dMRI EPI (denoised reconstruction)                                           | `dwi/sub-{subid}_ses-{sesid}_run-{seqnum}_rec-denoised_dwi.nii`           |
| Multi-band dMRI EPI (Chi2-maps)                                                         | `dwi/sub-{subid}_ses-{sesid}_run-{seqnum}_rec-chi2_dwi.nii`               |


### Outputs

The primary outputs of the full SHARD preprocessing pipeline are:

| Description                                                                  | Filename                                                                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Preprocessed DWI data (denoising, motion correction, and destriping)         | `dwi/sub-{subid}_ses-{sesid}_desc-preproc_dwi.nii.gz`                   |
| List of b-values in FSL format                                               | `dwi/sub-{subid}_ses-{sesid}_desc-preproc_dwi.bval`                     |
| List of gradient directions in FSL format                                    | `dwi/sub-{subid}_ses-{sesid}_desc-preproc_dwi.bvec`                     |

(located in `derivatives/dhcp_dmri_shard_pipeline/sub-{subid}/ses-{sesid}`)

The complete list of outputs and QC reports generated by the diffusion SHARD pipeline 
is listed in the [Diffusion SHARD pipeline](structure.html#diffusion-shard-pipeline) 
section of the directory structure summary.


### Pipeline

The third data release includes an alternative dMRI processing
pipeline based on denoising<sup>[1](#ref1)</sup> and SHARD motion
correction<sup>[2](#ref2)</sup>. This pipeline correponds more closely to
the fetal processing pipeline<sup>[3](#ref3)</sup>, and is therefore better
suited for studies that include both the fetal and the neonatal data.

The pipeline consists of the following processing steps:

1. Image denoising using random matrix theory with optimal
shrinkage in the complex domain (i.e., using magnitude and phase
images)<sup>[1](#ref1)</sup>. This denoising approach also accounts
for spatial noise correlations introduced by SENSE and Partial Fourier
subsampling. After denoising, the magnitude images are extracted.

2. The denoised images are then corrected for Gibbs
ringing<sup>[4](#ref4)</sup>.

3. Fat shift suppression is achieved through local outlier reweighting in
slice-to-volume reconstruction (step 5)<sup>[5](#ref5)</sup>. The local
outlier weights are computed independently based on the residuals of the
SENSE reconstruction (Chi2-maps). This is achieved using a 2-class Gaussian 
Mixture Model with a Markov Random Field, fitted using Expectation-Maximization.

4. The B0 field map, used to model susceptibility-induced distortion,
is estimated using FSL Topup<sup>[6](#ref6)</sup>. As input for topup, we
selected the two "best" b=0 volumes for each of the 4 phase encoding (PE)
directions based on a edge-detection filter in the slice direction. The
indices of the selected 8 volumes are stored and used as reference; the
ordering of the image volumes and the corresponding diffusion encoding is
thus never changed.

5. Motion correction using SHARD slice-to-volume
reconstruction<sup>[2](#ref2)</sup>.  The inputs are the denoised and
degibbsed multiband dMRI images (stage 2), the voxel weights (step 3),
and the field map (step 4). The output are estimated subject motion traces,
slice weights used to correct dropouts, and the SHARD representation fitted
to the scattered slice data. The SHARD reconstruction also modelles the
slice profile to recover the images at isotropic resolution.  The motion-
and distortion-corrected image is stored as a series of Spherical Harmonics
(SH) coefficients for each shell.

6. The 5D SHARD output image is projected onto the original diffusion encoding
used during acquisition, to provide the dMRI output in a format compatible with
conventional software. This is a one-to-one mapping representing identical
image information. Note that motion-induced gradient reorientation is modelled
during SHARD slice-to-volume reconstruction in step 5; the gradient table
hence remains unchanged.

7. Inter-slice intensity inhomogeneities were subsequently estimated and
corrected on the motion-corrected projected dMRI volumes from step 6 using
*dStripe*<sup>[7](#ref7)</sup>.  Note that these corrections were applied
to the reconstructed dMRI data, not to the 5D SHARD output image.

8. Rigid alignement to high-resolution structural (T2-weighted) space
using normalised mutual information (NMI) based registration with FSL
Flirt <sup>[8](#ref8)</sup>on the mean b=1000 s/mm<sup>2</sup> shell. This
transformation is combined with a non-linear registration<sup>[9](#ref9)</sup>
of the T2w volume to the 40 weeks template<sup>[10](#ref10)</sup> to allow
transformations between diffusion and atlas spaces.

<a name="shard-qc"></a>
### Diffusion MRI QC

Automated quality control metrics are calculated for several key steps in
the pipeline. Specifically, the data release includes estimates of:

- **Signal-to-Noise Ratio**: A measure of SNR is calculated based on the
  residuals of denoising (Step 1). The reported metrics are the median
  across a brain mask of the RMS residuals, divided by the median of the
  mean b=0 signal.

- **Motion metrics**: Measures of the mean translation and rotation that was
  detected/estimated in the motion correction method.<sup>[2](#ref2)</sup>
  These metrics are based on the gradient of the motion trace, thus measuring
  the subject activity during the scan.

- **Outlier ratio**: The mean outlier weight of all slices in the data, as
  detected in slice-to-volume reconstruction.<sup>[2](#ref2)</sup>

In addition, overview screenshots of the motion traces and destriped output
data are generated. Based on these screenshots, visual pass/fail Quality
Control identified a small subset of cases to be discarded from analysis.

All QC metrics are available in the `combined.tsv` spreadsheet in the
[supplementary](https://github.com/BioMedIA/dHCP-release-notes/tree/master/supplementary_files).


### References

<a name="ref1"/>1. Cordero-Grande, L., Christiaens, D., Hutter, J., Price,
A.N., Hajnal, J.V.  **Complex diffusion-weighted image estimation via matrix
recovery under general noise models** *Neuroimage (2019), 200: 391-404.* [DOI:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.06.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.06.039)

<a name="ref2"/>2. Christiaens, D., Cordero-Grande, L., Pietsch, M.,
Hutter, J., Price, A.N., Hughes, E.J., Vecchiato, K., Deprez, M., Edwards,
A.D., Hajnal, V., Tournier, J-D.  **Scattered slice SHARD reconstruction
for motion correction in multi-shell diffusion MRI** *NeuroImage (2021),
225: 117437.* [DOI:
 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117437](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117437)

<a name="ref3"/>3. Christiaens, D., Cordero-Grande, L., Price, A.N.,
Hutter, J., Hughes, E.J., ounsell, S.J., Tournier, J-D., Hajnal, J.V. **Fetal
diffusion MRI acquisition and analysis in the developing Human Connectome
Project** *ISMRM 2020, O629.*

<a name="ref4"/>4. Kellner, E., Dhital, B., Kiselev, V.G., Reisert,
M. **Gibbs-ringing artifact removal based on local subvoxel-shifts.**
*Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (2016) 76: 1574–1581.* [DOI:
10.1002/mrm.26054](https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.26054)

<a name="ref5"/>5. Christiaens, D., Cordero-Grande, L., Hutter, J.,
Price, A.N., O'Murchearthaigh, J., Vecchiato, K., Hajnal, J.V., Tournier,
J-D. **Fat-shift suppression in diffusion MRI using rotating phase encoding
and localised outlier weighting** *ISMRM 2020, O981.*

<a name="ref6"/>6. Andersson, J.L., Skare, S., and
Ashburner, J. **How to correct susceptibility distortions
in spin-echo echo-planar images: application to diffusion
tensor imaging** *Neuroimage (2003), 20(2): 870-888.* [DOI:
10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00336-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00336-7)

<a name="ref7"/>7. Pietsch, M. and Christiaens, D. and Hajnal, J.V. &
Tournier, J-D. **dStripe: slice artefact correction in diffusion
MRI via constrained neural network** *biorxiv (2020)* [DOI:
10.1101/2020.10.20.347518](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.347518)

<a name="ref8"/>8. Jenkinson, M., Bannister, P., Brady, M., and Smith,
S. **Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration
and motion correction of brain image** *Neuroimage (2002), 17(2): 825-841.*
[DOI: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1132](https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1132)

<a name="ref9"/>9. Andersson, J.L.R., Jenkinson,
M., and Smith, S. [**Non-linear registration, aka spatial
normalisation**](https://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/datasets/techrep/tr07ja2/tr07ja2.pdf)
*FMRIB technical report TR07JA2 (2010).*

<a name="ref10"/>10. Schuh, A., Makropoulos, A., Robinson, E.C.,
Cordero-Grande, L., Hughes, E., Hutter, J., Price, A.N., Murgasova,
M., Teixeira, R.P.A.G., Tusor, N., Steinweg, J.K., Victor, S.,
Rutherford, M.A., Hajnal, J.V., Edwards, A.D., and Rueckert,
D. **Unbiased construction of a temporally consistent morphological
atlas of neonatal brain development** *bioRxiv (2018), 251512.* [DOI:
10.1101/251512](https://doi.org/10.1101/251512)



